I became interested in Dawson Church after reading
an article he wrote, called Personal Disarmament.
It seems that if there were ever a time to disarm,
it would be now, and not just for governments,
but for individuals.
According to Dawson, the key is to do
whatever is necessary to interrupt the auto-programmed
response we each have when our
sensitivities are pushed.
In the end, he says, it's up to every individual to take
responsibility for diffusing our own hot buttons
before this can reflect out to the world at large.
(light orchestral music)
You wrote a wonderful piece of work called,
Personal Disarmament and it is such an important
subject of the day on many levels.
Globally and personally and everything in between.
And when you set up this article,
you started talking about two distinct types
of people and one is the protester the other
is the mystic, and let's start out there and why
you began with those two kind of classic types
of individuals.
Well the mystic, of course, is at the pinnacle of
every religion, and every religion has its mystics,
and these are people who are focused on the interior
life, they often withdraw from the world.
They are people who have an intense focus on
embodying their scripture, and the protester
on the other hand is somebody who has an intense
focus on the outer world, and righting injustices and
making changes in the outer world.
And it seems at first glance as though there's very little
for the mystic to talk to the protester about,
and vice versa, so the activist, somebody who is
advocating for change in the outer world,
is the opposite of the spectrum,
and yet it turns out that,
these aren't so far apart after all.
That as we produce genuine internal change
within ourselves, it affects the outer world,
in all kinds of ways.
For example, the quality of our interactions
with each other as we, for instance,
are triggered, as our stress response is aroused,
if we have some tools to release that
and to calm ourselves, then suddenly the quality
of our relationships, with our spouses,
with our children, with our parents,
with our coworkers, with chance people we meet.
How often have you maybe in your life,
had somebody just smile at you you didn't know?
And it changed your whole day.
There's a wonderful story in one of my books about
a guy who was at the end of his tether,
and he was actually taking a walk to the
plant to kill himself, and as he was walking
along the sidewalk, he got to an intersection
and he stopped at the intersection for a red light,
and a woman in a car looked at him and held his eyes
and smiled, and he changed his mind about killing himself.
These chance interactions, as we learn to shift ourselves,
can make an enormous difference in the world,
so I no longer believe that there's a huge tension,
and that either you change yourself or you change the world,
I now believe that by working on these inner change events,
you indeed can have an enormous impact on society
and you have no idea what that impact might be.
I remember I have a daughter who's 30 years old now,
and you ask kids what they did during the day,
and they say, "nothing."
And so one day after school I said to her,
and she was 12 at the time, "Angela, what happened
"today at school, what was your day like?"
And she said, "nothing, nothing happened,"
so I said, "Well Darling, do you know that
"when I saw you in the kitchen this morning, before
"you went to school, you threw your arms around me
"and said how much you love me, and my whole
"day was better because of that,"
And she said, "oh yeah, I talked to Katie today,"
And she went on to recount how she'd helped one
friend of hers that day,
and I said, "you know, Darling, you might have helped
"12 people today through that, and I might have
"helped 12 people have a better day as a result
"of you shifting me this morning in the kitchen,
"so you might, 12 times 12 have helped
"and shifted 144 people at 12 years old
"with no money." (laughs)
Now that's influence, and so that's how,
as we learn to live happy, unstressed,
relaxed lives, in tune with ourselves,
we can have enormous influence on the world around us.
And yet we are all fighting ourselves,
any little demons and outside voices that we may
take offense to, for example, or actually only a reflection
of our internal voice, is that partially true?
And this is also patterned in our psychology,
in our brains, through our neural nets, and how
do we go about, let's talk about that for a moment,
how we lay these programs down and I would love
to follow up with how we go ahead and start
breaking apart those programs.
Yes, and unfortunately, those programs are very,
very, very difficult to change, and people will
go for a retreat in a zen monastery,
or a Christian monastery,
and maybe be apart from the world for a week,
be with a great saint and have some sort
of shifting experience,
but then go back, and the moment they get back
to their office or their spouse or their child,
they're right back in their old patterns again,
and these are very, very hard patterns to change.
They're ingrained in our biochemistry,
and it's like,
if you like your coffee
with say, four ounces of cream,
and two scoops of sugar.
If someone hands you a cup of coffee with six scoops
of sugar and 12 ounces of cream,
you take one sip and you know right away
something's wrong.
Our internal biochemistry is like this.
It's layed down early in life, and so we all marvel
at the person who stays in an abusive relationship.
And yet they get out of the relationship and they
find another abuser, right away,
or they become another abuser right away.
Because they're used to the internal
biochemistry of that, and if they try a healthy
relationship, it's like sipping the wrong cup of coffee,
so their internal biochemistry, they're wired
both neurologically and biochemically to respond
to those types of situations, and a healthy
experience actually literally feels wrong in their cells.
It's not their experience.
It's not their resonance.
It's not
And you use an example of if you are sending
out a specific resonance it's no difference than a bell
ringing that starts resonating through the other bells.
Yes, absolutely, yeah.
And it's hard to change that note if we use that note
our whole lives, we have this pattern laid out
early in our lives and we tend to repeat
it over and over and over again,
and if we interrupt it every once in awhile,
with say, and enlightened experience, or reading
a marvelous book, or a piece of music that shifts us,
these are very temporary experiences, and we
revert right back to the old biochemistry.
So what I look for is therapies, and there are
very, very, very few nowadays that can make
permanent alterations in that biochemical baseline,
I call it, that can permanently change your taste
of the mix of coffee.
Yes (laughs) and you actually quoted
Eckhart Tolle, I like this quote, it says,
"we should be at least as interested
"in our reactions as in the person
"who created that reaction," right?
(laughs)
The incidents that created that reaction
now that's some wisdom and that's where you're
coming from, that's what you're working with.
How do we throw the brakes on,
in that moment when someone has just hit
your hot button, how do we throw the brakes
on long enough to actually have a chance of
affecting a genuine shift?
Well, the first thing is just to throw the brakes on.
If there's anything you can do to throw the brakes on,
do it, because in that moment when we feel urgently,
as if we have to act that way,
there's no other option,
we have to say this thing,
we feel this pressing urgency,
this is the stress response, biochemically driving us,
and we are incapable at that point of anything
like intelligent action usually.
We're being governed by our fight or flight response,
and as long as we're in the grip of that biochemistry
it's quite hard to do anything,
but if you pause for just a few minutes,
all the cortisol your body's produced,
the stress chemistry of cortisol, adrenaline
and so on,
that gets reabsorbed, those molecules are broken
down and reabsorbed, so example if you say,
have an argument with somebody and you walk
out of the office or walk out of the house,
within 10, 20 minutes, you feel calm, that's because
your cortisol's being reabsorbed and being put to
some good use, so if you can first stop yourself
in any way, shape or form, walk out of the situation,
do something to not say that word,
or not respond the same way,
immediately you're ahead, so that's
half the battle is just don't say that thing
that feels so urgent to you and in fact that urgency
is a signal to you that your stress response is engaged,
and when your stress response is engaged, your whole
cognitive function gets shut down,
so you aren't thinking clearly and you're not in
a position to offer anything of value to your spouse
or your coworker, or your child or your parent,
so it's important to interrupt that pattern in some way,
just stopping is the first thing.
And then there are therapies.
I'm working with several right now.
Broadly, they're called energy psychology,
and what they do, is they seem to have the effect
of very, very quickly draining that emotional intensity
behind the issue.
One study we're doing right now is with Iraq veterans,
people coming back from Iraq with post-traumatic
stress syndrom, PTSD, and these people who
often have witnessed some horrendous event,
like civilians being killed,
or the humvee in front of them being blown up
with their friends inside,
people with severe stress, which again,
they repeat over and over and over again
in their mind, and as they repeat it,
we human beings can produce the stress response
not based on the humvee blowing up in front of us
two years ago, but thinking about that same experience
over and over and over again, so we have elevated cortisol,
so we become used to this oversecretion of cortisol,
and we have this repetitive stress event in our body.
And so to interrupt that is tough,
so experimenting now with these veterans to see if
we interrupt that stress event,
in their mental processes,
the bad things still happen but at least
they've had all the stress attached to it,
so draining that emotional intensity away from
the experience doesn't negate the experience,
but at least you don't have that same stress response,
which is causing all these bad effects in your body.
Let's take that out now into the family.
So one of these veterans comes home,
he's reliving this event,
now let's look at how that then begins having
a ripple effect throughout family life,
throughout society, and that's,
since you brought it up we can use this.
Hundreds of thousands of veterans came back
from Vietnam and America as a whole did
very little to reabsorb them,
in fact people spat on them in the street sometimes.
And so as a society we did almost nothing to
reintegrate them back into society.
Now we'll have 150,000 or perhaps all told,
maybe 400,000 people having cycled through Iraq,
what do we do with these people?
Many of whom will have pain,
will have post-traumatic stress and so on.
We have to, as a society, develop far better tools
for doing this, that's why we are studying them.
But if we can teach them to deal with that stress event
that happened way back when, then they're much less
likely to express that in the form of domestic violence,
violence toward their kids, or dissociation or other things.
So it's really important we start to treat those
and develop a plan to treat this soon,
and so what we're doing with these veterans
is a technique called emotional freedom techniques,
or EFT.
And EFT just by using some very
natural stress reduction gestures in an organized fashion,
within a few seconds we find we can alter this
cortisol balance in the body,
and without any sort of thought or psychotherapy
or medication or surgery, very, very quickly the
stress response is released and eventually
the person comes back to a base line of function.
Yes, we interviews a man named
Phillip Montrose who has a couple
of books out on EFT also, so I would refer
our viewers at this point to also watch
that interview, because he breaks down
what you do, how it's done,
and the technical elements of it.
Does he show it on the video?
Does he as actually so you what to do? Good.
Yes, he does, he shows you what to do.
So let's talk about--
Let me just have one more word about that.
The basis of EFT is a series of
points of our bodies which people touch naturally
so if we're startled we might go (rapid inhale).
Or you know, people if they're
worried they might go like this.
Or if they're startled, yes, right.
Or, this sort of thing,
and it turns out that these points, these points,
these points, these points and these points
are ones we naturally touch when we're under stress
and think nothing of it, but it turns out,
if we touch them and breathe,
or tap them, or in some way move them
physically in an organized way, suddenly
the stress, the whole feeling of stress goes away.
And it's quite amazing, if you're used to long courses
of therapy, to just be able to touch a few of these
natural stress reduction points and have
your stress quickly dissipate.
But it does indeed do so.
It does and you actually are aware of,
or involved with other studies going on where this
is actually being incorporated.
Pain, yes.
can you talk about some of the studies
that are going on and also it's potential
use in Britain right now?
Yes, Britain, unlike the US,
Britain has a nationalized, nation wide
health service run by the government,
and it also operates at about half the cost
of the American one, and insures everybody.
Right now there are two trials under way,
or planned, in the national health service
in England, for using EFT with elderly patients
with pain patients.
And what we're doing also with Kaiser Permanente
one of the Kaiser hospitals in Ohio,
is a study on pain.
So we're taking people who can't be helped by,
chronic pain patients who, basically the medical
profession throws up their hands and can't
help them anymore, trying EFT with them.
And it turns out that we aren't working on the pain so much,
but we're working on the underlying emotional
causes below the pain, 'cause guess what,
if you have pain, the chances are very, very good that
something happening emotionally in your life,
or that did happen earlier which is causing that pain,
or resulting in that pain, for example,
Kaiser did this study of 17,400 adults
in the US and they looked at the correlation
between adult diseases, cancer, hypertension,
bone fractures, heart disease, looked at the relationship
of all these diseases to early childhood wounding,
emotional trauma and it found a striking correlation
between people having early childhood trauma
and a whole host of diseases as adults.
If you had significantly high levels of these
childhood negative experiences.
For example, you are 30 times more likely
to commit suicide, or attempt suicide if you're a man
you're 4,600 times as likely to be an intravenous
drug user, but across the board, bone fractures,
diabetes, high correlation with early childhood stress.
So it's important that we take these traumas,
and teach people the tools, simple tools like
these natural stress-reduction gestures
to help them release these things and not be
carrying around this load of suffering which may
result in pain or all kinds of symptoms later on
down the road.
And a lot of people attribute this to,
well it's genetic.
Hey my mother had the same thing,
her hips were bad to and on and on.
Another person you're along side,
on the side is Bruce Lipton,
and Bruce of course talks about a lot of this
in Biology of Belief, but you also have done an
awful lot of work dealing with
the soul's nature, even before infancy,
even in utero, haven't you done some of that work?
Yes I have, I wrote a book called,
Communing with the Spirit of Your Unborn Child,
and parenting really begins at that level,
and I'm such a strong believer in the spiritual
aspects of health and disease,
because if we are just focusing on our body,
the whole of current microbiology focuses
on molecular targets,
we're looking for a molecule to knock out
or affect another molecule,
but we don't function that way as people,
we function as systems,
so if you can reduce the stress on the whole system,
or a subsystem of the human body,
you can be affecting thousands or even
hundreds of thousands of different substances
at the same time, so we need
to look broadly at how to bring spirit and soul
how do we bring love into our lives?
Bring forgiveness in?
You can bring forgiveness in and change
your biochemistry and change 20,000 proteins
at the same time, rather than that molecular target,
so our whole research forcus as a society is
very limited.
I love modern medicine, and biochemical
medicine has many wonderful benefits for us,
but if we are just focusing on those limited
bits of our functioning, and ignoring the way we
feel as human beings, then we're missing
a big part of the picture, so bringing in spirituality
love, altruism, altruism has huge health effects.
Social connection has big health effects.
Visualization, meditation, prayer.
All of these things have what I call, epigenetic
medical effects, because again, they are affecting our
genes, they're sending signals to our genes that have
various kinds of effects at the level of the gene.
So they're outside of the gene,
but they're affecting the gene.
They're affecting the gene.
Can you go a little bit more into the work you did
with the unborn children?
Yes, well, I define parenting,
as the parents job is to connect with the soul
of the child and to allow that soul to express
fully through the child's heart, mind and body,
that's my parenting definition and when you parent
as though your job is to make that connection
with the soul of this being, and then let that soul
flow into expression,
with unconditional love, no criticism,
just acceptance of that soul, it's remarkable
how that soul can blossom in that child's heart
and mind and body.
What are some personal observations
you've made where this is done properly?
Do you have any kind of anecdotal stories?
We love stories.
Yes, many.
One thing I do, whenever I see a newborn baby,
I look at that baby, you know that babies are
sort of unfocused, babies look around like this,
but if someone looks at them,
and there's someone saying, "Hey, the world's a safe place."
"It's full of love", and you shine that through your eyes,
you'll see the baby like, open its eyes
and look full startled, and may it'll smile,
it will hold your eyes,
so we can communicate that with children
very readily and I find that with my own kids,
I have three children and it's been an amazing
voyage of discovery to be able to when I was sometimes
unable to figure out, for example, my son with homework
when he was about seven or eight,
could not focus on his homework,
nothing worked, rewards didn't work,
punishment didn't work,
he was a very distractable kid and nothing would
help him focus, and so at my wit's end, I just sat there
and did what we call in transpersonal psychology,
you just focus on your soul,
the other person's soul and you do thats of loops
so rather than this level loop, you're going up there
into the other person's soul, and asking the other
person's soul, at a level far beyond the abilties
of your own mind, "what's going on here?"
And the message I got was, sit with him while
he does his homework.
And I thought, that's ridiculous, I'll waste my time
as well as his if I sit with him,
it doesn't make any sense to sit at the table with
him as he does his homework.
So then okay, I'll sit with him.
And I just, we just sit down there, and be
with him while he did his homework,
and for whatever reason, it worked.
Now this happened over and over again in parenting
for me when I was at my wit's end,
I couldn't think of any solutions as
I'm a bright guy, sometimes and I could not
figure things out.
But just to be able to have a heart connection and a soul
connection with a child.
(mumbles) a child's misbehaving.
Sometimes just sending a beam of heart energy
and love to them and they straighten out
without anything else being required,
so if you have the resources of your heart,
your soul your spirit, the child's spirit,
you have an array of resources far beyond
that of any parenting book you could ever read.
I would invite any parent to give this a try.
Just try connecting with the soul of the child,
if the child's misbehaving,
if the child's obstreperous,
if you're having a hard time disciplining the child,
again just focus on this heart connection and you
might find messages.
For example, one woman I talked to when I
was writing this book, was a vegetarian
and she tuned into her child's soul and felt the strong
sense that she should be eating meat
during the pregnancy, and it turned out that was
the perfect thing to do,
but if she had been just following her belief
system, she wouldn't have done that.
So you get access to a whole range of information
intuitively this way, you don't have access to otherwise.
And this is really the starting point
at how we begin to heal our societies, we start
in the home, so let's take what we originally
began with in terms of,
you're now with your child and you and your child
may not be on the same page, may not be on the
same resonance and you have some acting out
going on, on the part of the child.
What about helping that child learn
some of those same techniques you're
talking about, maybe not EFT,
but maybe just stopping and breathing
or counting to 10, as you and
Thomas Jefferson suggest
(laughter)
I think he said count to 100 if that doesn't work.
So would you say that it's never too early
to begin working with our children and learning
how to find their own flashipoints and deal with them?
Or is that something you really would wait and work
on in yourself and maybe wait 'til a more
mature time in life?
I think you always start by
working on yourself, I have to say
I believe it's in couple work,
in social work, and work with children,
parents, whatever.
If you yourself are triggered,
your ability, even neurologically to hear
your best ideas, your highest wisdom,
is severely impaired.
So until you've been able to relax, then you're
almost completely unable to deal with a child
or any stress in your life.
So the first thing to do, for example,
I was married for 10 years, I used to joke that
after I had a fight with my wife,
I would realize pretty quickly that it was
about 5% my fault, I knew it was 95% her fault,
it was 5% my fault.
After about two hours, I would realize, you know it
was about 50/50, it was about 50% my fault,
and about half her fault.
By the next day I would realize it was about 95% my fault,
and all she'd done was trigger some old wound
or pattern in me that had resulted in this thing.
So changing her is something I cannot do, but
changing myself is something I can do,
and if we're able to deactivate our own trigger,
suddenly we can see clearly.
Oh, you know, maybe I'll let that behavior of
my child's go, it's not with the candle,
but maybe I will pay attention to this one,
this one has to straighten out,
but don't treat every one with the same intensity,
you can't make that sort of evaluation while
you yourself are stressed.
So I have people do EFT or another one,
a wonderful one is called Tapas
Acupuncture Technique, TAT.
TAT works great.
There are a whole bunch of these in my books,
and on my website, so if you look at any of these
techniques, they can help you de-stress,
and once you're de-stressed, you can deal
with your partner.
Your partner may never change, your husband
or your wife, may always be the same and have
the same annoying characteristics,
and you probably cannot change them,
but you sure can change yourself,
and once you do that, you can see what you can do
creatively in the situation in the marriage,
and in the child raising situation and to be
really effective.
And you also wrote,
which is something I like that continues this out
into society at large and there was a comment in there.
The collective reactivity of a nation of individually
reactive people is very dangerous to the world.
And let's look at the United States, and examples
of countries that,
can reasonably be said to be dangerous to the world
and this point in time,
and the US is one of them,
we're taking on a very aggressive role at this time.
And we are also looking at great polarization,
really high reactivity within the population,
within the media as opposed to say, Tibet.
Yes, which responded passively
to the Chinese invasion in 1915,
and another example, a really sad example
is the war, that Israel fought with Hezbollah,
last year where they, you know,
Hezbollah (mumbles) soldiers,
then Israel attacked into Lebanon,
killed about two or three thousand Lebanese
civilians, Hezbollah kept firing missiles back.
And my prayer is that at some point,
we can, rather than, again these national aggressions
and hatreds, and the Bosnia situation, these are individual
ones, writ large.
These are individual projections that turn out to have
terrible effects unless they're checked,
and at some point, we as a world,
clearly, absolutely must learn to release these,
and we can.
I'll give you an example from Kosovo.
When the Serbian army was rampaging through Kosovo,
killing many civilians,
there was one village in which they separated the men
and the boys from the women and the girls,
they rounded them up into three locations,
there was no single building big enough
for all the men, so they round them up
into three different locations,
and they machine gun them all down,
they just slaughtered them all.
It so happened that there was one survivor
in each of those cases who was in the middle
of the group, and this one man had survived,
so there were three men who'd survived
this terrible massacre,
and later on after this, a team of researchers
went to Kosovo to work with some of these
massacre survivors and they were doing these
energy psychology techniques,
these aren't just for your marriage or for your parenting.
They've been used with people with severe traumas,
they've been used in Rwanda with survivors
in the massacres there.
And so they had to work with this one man who survived,
they had to work on the sound of the gunfire,
the screams of his dying companions,
they had to work on the color
of the Serbian Army uniforms,
they had to work on (mumbles) bit by bit by bit,
but that man,
in a one year follow-up was found to have
substantially recovered.
He still had the terrible memories, but they werent
they weren't at that high level of producing cortisol
in his body every single day,
as he would re-live them.
So these sorts of techniques, if we, say,
could send teams of peacekeepers into potential
conflict zones, could have a huge effect,
and I'm hoping that in a future time,
say when three Israeli soldiers are kidnapped
on the border of Lebanon,
we would have teams of peacekeepers go in
beforehand, work on people,
help them release their stress,
and so suddenly these national hatreds couldn't
suddenly become conflagrations that kill
thousands of innocent people.
So again, it's back to us,
back to us as individuals, our families, collectively,
as societies, we have to begin looking at our own
trigger points
Yes, absolutely.
And this goes really even into John Hagelin's
work, you're looking at diffusing the reactivity,
which is huge, it's huge, like you say,
you can feel great in a seminar,
like this lovely seminar all week long,
and then you go home, and you get in a fight
with your sweetie or whatever,
and it's all back to square one.
So what you're adding to this picture
is absolutely essential.
And as John Hagelin and a lot of those
experiments have shown,
that when you have people that have
peace in their hearts,
and of course this extends out into the field,
and you talk about it even in the paper,
the Personal Disarmament,
about the tipping point, so to speak,
Like you say, it doesn't take 51% of the people
to have diffused their hot buttons.
Would you continue on that a bit.
Yes, it takes only a small amount of people
before radical social change occurs.
The example I give as well there is that when I
first came to the US 30 years ago,
the Soviet Union and the US were poised,
on the brink of nuclear war.
Yuri Andropov, head of the polit bureau,
and Ronald Reagan were,
I mean they were bitter enemies.
Andropov cut,
most of us have a phone line in our home,
and we also have an internet connection,
we have two phone lines,
Andropov cut all the phone lines between the USSR
and the USA except for two, there were two
lines available between the two countries,
cut most communication,
cut most cultural contacts,
so we had these two beligerent people,
they couldn't even talk to each other.
Terrible situation,
and I watched as the whole society went
from this terrible state of threat and
mutually assured destruction to I felt as though
we decided not to blow ourselves up at that moment.
It took a few people marching, protesting,
offering alternatives.
It took people, I actually flew with a team,
a medical team, to Russia, we just wanted
to talk to people, (mumbles),
there are no official contacts going on,
we will fly out there,
we will meet with the neurosurgeons,
we will meet with doctors,
we will form person-to-person contacts
to build these bridges,
and guess what, after about 10 years,
the Soviet Union had begun to crumble
partly as a result of huge social mind change,
so these huge mind changes do occur,
and it is possible for society.
England, Great Britain, used to,
Brittania rules the way, you know.
We used to think of ourselves as
masters of the universe, but now I think
most people look at some of the
valuable things we do, and can see a big
shift in social consciousness, and awareness.
I think these shifts are possible,
when they're boiling, they tend to not
be that visible, and then suddenly
they crystalize out and catalyze out.
A society like Sweden used to be a warlike
society, now it's regarded as one of the most
pacifist societies and democratic societies
in the world, so it's possible even for people
who have, with good child rearing,
when you start to raise your child without
punishment, without arbitrary education.
When a society shifts, suddenly, that society becomes,
as if I am at peace, I'm not a threat to you,
whereas if I'm all riled up, I am a threat to you.
If a society itself has been able to shift its
emotional balance point,
then suddenly it no longer is a threat to those around it,
so on a global scale it's possible for this to happen.
And it's not just possible it's essential,
it's absolutely essential we reach this point
which is absolutely critical it happen,
and it happen very very soon.
So I think no one doubts that we're in a make or break
century, we're at a make or break time
in human history, and I've had the
whimsical thought of applying to the EPA to put
homo sapiens on the endangered species act
because it's pretty clear, unless we do something.
(laughs)
We're history.
To delve deeper into the subjects that Dawson has
touched on here, you may also want to watch our
interviews with Phillip Montrose on EFT and
Bruce Lipton on the Biology of Belief.
If you'd like to check into Dawson's work on conflict
resolution, spiritual child rearing and more,
click on the links below to see a full list of his books.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(light orchestral music)